source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2nOj8MKHvmw

Feeling like taking a coffee break? So do I! What about we talk again about Loom? This time, not about Virtual Threads, but about the JEP 428, about Structured Concurrency, available as an incubator API in the JDK 19. This is still about Project Loom, probably one of the most anticipated features of the JDK 19. Let us talk about that, and yes, I heard you, you want some code, so let us see that in action, on real code! Before we start, do you know that all the team that is developing Loom as of now, will be at JavaOne, next October, in Vegas? Along with most of the people working on the other OpenJDK projects. I'll be there too, and I'd be super happy to share a real coffee with you, not a virtual one! Virtual coffees are nice, but a real one tastes so much better! And if you cant make it to Vegas, stay tune, because JavaOne is usually where everything about Java is announced. We will talk more about that. You can find all the links in the description. OK, so, we already saw in the previous JEP Café, that Loom brings a new kind of thread in the JDK, called virtual threads. If you want to learn more about virtual threads, you can watch the previous episod, linked down below, because we are not going to cover that again. There are two things you need to remember about virtual threads. First, they are cheap to create, and much cheaper than the regular platform threads you've been using in the JDK for many years, in fact, since the beginning of Java. Second, they are cheap to block. Blocking a platform thread is expensive, and you should avoid doing that, it's not the case for virtual threads. And bytheway, this is why asychronous programming based on callbacks and futures has been developed: to allow you to switch from one task to the other when this task is blocking, within the same thread, to avoid blocking this thread. Why? Because blocking a platform thread is expensive. What is the price of asynchronous code? Well, there are three things that are not that great. First, asynchronous code is hard to write, and even harder to read, we all know about that. Second, it is hard, if not impossible to correctly unit test asynchronous code, which is really an issue, because unit test is what makes you sure that your code is really doing what you think it does. And third, once you begin to write asynchronous code with callbacks, because of the way asynchronous programming is designed, you end up writing asynchronous code all over the place. Even for tasks that not need to be asynchronous, that does not block anything in any way, that you just need to wire on the outcome of your blocking code. So choosing to write asynchronous code based on callbacks is not a decision that you should make lightly, because it will have an impact on all your application. And lastly, it almost next to impossible to profile an asynchronous application. On the other hand, blocking a virtual thread is cheap. No need to try to avoid the blocking a virtual thread: just block it and that's it! You can write your code in a blocking, synchronous way, as long as you run it on top of virtual threads, it's perfectly fine. That been said, do virtual threads solve all your problems? Hmmm… nope. There are still problems that need to be addressed. One of them is that, because they are so cheap, you can quickly end up with millions of them in your application. And that, is a problem. How can you find your way in so many threads? Will your IDE even be able to display all these threads in this little thread panel that you are used to? And if it can do that, how are you going to find the one thread you need to debug, if there are millions? The real question is: how are you going to interact with virtual threads? Since the JDK 5, you are not supposed to interact with threads directly. The right pattern is to submit a task, as a Runnable or as a Callable, to an Executor Service, or an Executor, and work with the Future you get in return. In fact, Loom keeps this model, and adds nice features to it. The first object I'm going to talk to you about is this scope object. The exact type is StructuredTaskScope, that's the name of the class. But we are going to call it scope, just because it's simpler. What is this scope object about? Well, you can see this object as a virtual threads launcher. You submit tasks to it, in the form of Callables, you get a future in return, and this callable is been executed in a virtual thread, created for you by the scope. Plain and simple. You may be thinking that it really looks like an executor, and it does. But there also are big differences between executors and scopes, that you are going to see. Suppose we want to query a weather forecast server. And we are really going to do that, because I created such a server on the Web. So here is the code that is going to query it. Here I have a readWeather() method, let me visit it. It's just reading this weather from A. Weather is a basic record, with a server name as a string of characters, and the weather forecast itself, also as a string of characters. This method is just creating an instance of Weather from a a JSON object, because this is what our server is sending us. And now I have this readWeatherFromA() method, that is just basic HTTP client code, that launches a request on this URL, then gets the response, and if the status code is 200, it creates a Weather instance from the JSON it gets. So let me just run this code. We are currently running Loom from the early access branch. And you can see that we could query this server in roughly 500ms. So now, let me make this code asynchronous. For that I need a scope object, so I'm going to create it. It's a StructuredTaskScope instance. It has a parameter, which is going to be Weather. And because this StructuredTaskScope instance is in fact AutoCloseable, I'm going to surround it with a try-with-resources pattern. The first step for this scope pattern, is that we are going to fork a task, which is going to be a Callable. And this Callable is going to simply be Weather::readWeatherFromA. That's a Callable. And then, once you've done that, you need to call the join() method of this scope object. This fork() method in fact, returns a Future object, I'm going to call it future, futureA, because it reads weather from A. And getting this Future object is non-blocking. You get it immediately. Now when you call this join() method, join() is a blocking call, that will block this thread until all the tasks that have been submitted to this StructuredTaskScope are complete. So when join() returns, you know that futureA is complete, and you can just call resultNow() on this future. resultNow() will throw an exception if you call it and the future is not complete, so you really need to do that after the call to join(). And this is going to be your weather, let me call it weatherA. Great. And now I can return weatherA, just like that. And if I run this code again, of course, the result will be the same. And that's it! This is how you can use a scope. Super simple! At this point you may be thinking… Meeeh, all this mess just for that? Bear with me, there is more to be seen on these scope objects. First, what are the differences between a scope object and an Executor Service? Well, there are two main differences. The first one is that, you create your executors when your application is launched. And you shut them down when your application is done. An Executor Service has the same life cycle as your application. This is how you should be using executor services, because executor services hold platform threads, and platform threads are expensive to create. So you want to pool them. They are precious. On the other hand, a scope is just a launcher for virtual threads. You don't need to pool virtual threads, because virtual threads are cheap. So once you are done with a scope, you can just close it and garbage it, no problem. The second difference is that an executor holds a single queue. All your tasks are added to this queue, and the different threads from this executor service, will take them, one at a time, when they have the opportunity. A scope on the other hand, is built on a fork / join pool. So each thread has its own wait list. In case a thread is not doing anything, I'm not sure when this could happen to be honest, it can steal a task from another queue. This pattern is called the "work stealing pattern" and it is implemented by fork / join pools in the JDK. Right, let us go one step further. Suppose you want to query several weather forecast servers instead of just one. This could speed up your process: because all your results are supposed to be equivalent. So once you get the first one, you can cancel all the others. It turns out that there is a special scope for that. That does exactly that. It is an extension of the basic StructuredTaskScope class, and is called the StructuredTaskScope.ShutdownOnSuccess. And yes, there is also a ShutdownOnFailure class. So what does this ShutdownOnSuccess scope do? Well, let us take a look at it. The pattern to use this ShutdownOnSuccess scope is exactly the same as the other one. We are going to open this ShutdownOnSuccess. Dot ShutdownOnSuccess. It is also parametered by Weather. And then I'm going to call more than one weather forecast, so let me call B and C. Adn I'm just going to duplicate this method: B and C. This is C and it's calling 3, and this is B and it's calling 2. So this it readWeatherFromB() and readWeatherFromC(). And now I get three futures: futureA, futureB, and futureC. And the way this ShutdownOnSuccess is working is that it will take the first future to provide an answer, and cancel all the others. So instead of calling resultA.resultNow(), I'm now going to call scope.result(), and get rid of this. This throws an ExecutionException, fine, it doesn't throw this IOException any more. And I'm going to print the state of this different futures: futureA.state(), same for B, same for C. So let me just do that: futureB, futureC. Let me run this code again. And you can see that futureA is the winner, it was thr first to provide an answer, and this ShutdownOnSuccess scope cancelled automaticaly the two other tasks, that are futureB and futureC. These two are in a FAILED state, meaning that they have been interrupted by the scope itself. So let me go back to the code. We do not need this code in fact, this is just technical code, so the futures are in fact out of our scope code. And this is the code you need to write to just query serveral servers and get the result from the first that is going to give you an answer. Let me just go one step further and show you a little trick. Here I just extracted a private method readWeatherFrom(), just to put the URL in a parameter, which is probably much cleaner than the previous version of the code, with all the duplicate code. And now what I would like to show you is that you can use the Stream API to launch this kind of things. See? I'm going to put all these URL in a stream: 1, 2 and 3, this is 2 and 3. And what I can do is map this URL, so this is my URL. And now I need to make it a Callable: readWeatherFrom(url).But I also need to tell this map() method that the returned type of the Function I just wrote is in fact a Callable. There is no way the compiler can infer that. So I need to tell the map() method there that this is in fact a Function that returns a Callable. And now this code is compiling. And now that I have a stream of callables, I can just pass these callables to scope::fork. So if you write your code in that way, then you do not need this code anymore. And if you run it, of course, it will give you the exact same result. So, as you can see, it is possible to write this with a Stream, it is perfectly legal because in this stream nothing is blocking, this call to fork() is not blocking. I'm not so sure that writing it with a Stream improved the readability, so maybe I will get rid of this ugly code, and stick to the previous pattern. The pattern to use this ShutdownOnSuccess scope is exactly the same as the other one. You open, fork your tasks, you join, and you get the result. The way it works is a little different. Here I have all the future objects, and when the join() returns, there is one future that is done, and the others have been cancelled. This is very handy: the interruptions are handled by the scope itself. And bytheway, you don't need to get these futures, you can just call the result() method of this scope object to get your result. No need to handle the future objects there. Your business code becomes much cleaner, without any technical objects in your way. Futures are technical objects. You just fork your tasks, call join, call result, and that's it! Why is it possible to do so? Well, precisely because a scope object is in fact specialized, it is business focused. It processes one business need, instead of blindly processing all the asynchronous tasks of your application. What is happening if a task fails with an exception? Well, it depends on the scope. For the ShutdownOnSuccess scope, this task will not be selected to produce a result. But now, if all your tasks are failing, then you will get an ExecutionException, with the exception from the first future that completed as a root cause. Could it be possible to go one step further, and create your own business scope? Well, you cannot extend ShutdownOnSuccess, because it's a final class, but you can still wrap it, you can still compose it, if this is what you want. But you can certainly extend StructuredTaskScope. So let us do that. Suppose that, instead of Weather forecasts, we are now going to query quotations, for a travel agency. And, as we did for the weather forecast, we need to query several quotations servers, to get the best price possible. The code we want to write is the following: fork the queries on the quotation server, call join(), because this is how scopes are working, and then just call bestQuotation(), just as you called result() on this StructuredTaskScope.ShutdownOnSuccess. Now of course, there is no bestQuotation() method on this StructuredTaskScope class, so what we really need to do is create our own class, and instead of having that, having a QuotationScope. I'm going to create this class there: public class QuotationScope extends StructuredTaskScope, to make it work. And now it's ok to have a bestQuotation() in this class that is going to return null, because it's my class, I can do whaterver I want with it. Now, of course you need to add some code to this QuotationScope class. And there is in fact one method that you need to override, which is a callback on the completion of your Future objects. Once a task is done, and a Future is complete, then there is method, handleComplete() that is called, with that Future object, as an argument. So let me override this method. It's this one, handleComplete(), ok. It takes a future as an argument, and the future it takes is complete. What I need to do it check for the state of this future. And I don't have that many states, I basically have four. Let me first begin by RUNNING.This method should not be called with a RUNNING future. So, if it is the case, by all mean, report this bug on the Loom mailing list, because, yes, that's a bug, and it needs to be fixed. But I still need to handle this case. So let me throw this new IllegalStateException("Future is still running..."). And it should not be. Of course the state I'm going to prefer is the SUCCESS state. Now, what is going to happen if my future is in SUCCESS? It means that, in fact, this future is carrying a result, which is a quotation, and I need to put this quotation somewhere. So I'm going to add it to a Collection: this.quotations.add(future.resultNow()). So this is going to be a Collection. I'm going to create it there. A Collection of Quotation, just like that. And now I need to think about it, right? This QuotationScope object is created by the thread who is calling readQuotation(). And all these handleComplete() methods there are called in the virtual threads that executed the future that is passed as an argument. It means that I have a potential race condition on this quotations reference. This quotations collection is created in a thread, and another thread is reading this reference to add content to it. So, you can put it volatile if you want, but putting it final is OK. You just need to make sure that this final keyword there, is there to make this quotations reference visible. And now the collection itself should not be just a plain ArrayList. Because the content added to this collection: all these quotation objects are going to be added from different threads. So this has to be a concurrent collection. So let me make it a ConcurrentLinkedDeque, yes, that is going to be fine. Now I have a thread-safe collection and a reference to this collection is visible, so my code is correct from the concurrency point of view. Right, I have another case to handle, which is the case FAILED. FAILED is the case where this quotation could not be read, because the server was not up, or there was a 404 error, this kind of things. I'm going to put this exception in the same kind of collection as the previous one: future.exceptionNow(). All right. And the same goes for this collection. Let duplicate that, OK. This is a collection of Throwable, because this is what exceptionNow() is returning. And this is exceptions. And the last case is the CANCELLED case. CANCELLED means that this future could not be executed until the end, maybe the scope was shutdown, maybe the thread was interrupted, there is nothing much I can do about it, so I'm just going to do nothing. All right. So now, I have a first quotations collection with the quotations in it, and a second one, with some exceptions. So what can I do in this bestQuotation() method? Well, all I need to do is analyze the content of this quotations collection, with a very simple pattern, which is basically a Stream pattern. I want to extract a min(), so let me just take the min(), comparing things with the price. And then call orElseThrow() on the Optional I get. Now, we need to write this code carefully. When is this orElseThrow() method going to throw an exception? It is going to throw an exception with this optional is empty. This optional is empty when the quotations collection is itself empty. If I have one element in it, then I will not have an exception. How could this quotations collection be empty? How could that happen? Well, if SUCCESS is never called, because FAILED is always called, it means that quotations will be empty, and I will have a bunch of exceptions in this exceptions collection. So maybe I need to check that! I'm going to create another method, public Exception exceptions(), OK. And bytheway, you know what? I'm going to create my own application exception: QuotationException. Just make it a static class that extends RuntimeException. An I'm going to create a quotationException = new QuotationException(). And I'm going to add all the exceptions from this exceptions collection, as suppressed exceptions to this QuotationException. So let me do that in that way. This.exceptions forEach(), and now I'm going to take this exception and call exception.addSuppressed(e). And bytheway, this is a nice method reference, so let me just write this code in that way. And return this exception. Right. So now I have a method, that will take all the exceptions from this collection, and that will gather them in one mother-exception of type QuotationException. And now what I can do is pass a Supplier to this orElseThrow(), bytheway this is another method reference. So if my quotations collection is empty, then I will throw one exception, with all the exceptions that these futures threw. And bytheway you can even call this method in your business code, just to check what happened with your tasks. If one of them is constantly failing, then you can get that information, and probably do something about it. So let me run this code. And see how this Quotation object is working. You can see that this time, Agency D answered with a price of 39. Let me run it again. And now the best server was server C, price 33. And you can see that compared to the classical asychronous code with callbacks, this code is itself fully asynchronous: each quotation is conducted in its own thread, but with a pattern that is completely synchronous. The nice thing with this scope object, is that you can write your code in a synchronous way, following very simple patterns, but it is executed in an asynchronous way, based on virtual threads. So that's the final code. As you can see, your business code is super simple: fork your tasks, call join() and then call your own business methods that will produce the result you need. The technical part of your code is also simple: all you need to do is write a callback to handle your future objects, one future at a time, and then add your business code that will decide how to reduce your partial results. Writing your unit tests is also super simple: you can create a completed future with a result or an exception directly with the API. Don't create mocks for that! You can create a complete Future with CompletableFuture.completedFuture() and pass the value you need, or if you need a failing future, you can use CompletableFuture.failedFuture() and pass the exception you want to throw. So really, writing unit tests for this class is super easy. Ok, how can we assemble our quotation and weather forecast in a nice travel page? What about we create a TravelPage record and put a quotation and a weather forecast in it? Let me do that. Here I have a readTravelPage() factory method, that is not compiling, because it should rely on a TravelPageScope. Just as we created a QuotationScope, we are going to create this scope. So let me do it here. Create a public static class TravelPageScope, it is going to extend StructuredTaskScope. And now we are facing our first problem: it is that the StructuredTaskScope class is parametered by a type that should be common to all the Callables that you are going to submit to this scope. Currently the only common type between Weather and Quotation is the Object type, which is not that great. We would like to have a more precise type on that. So let me create a PageComponent type, let me create it as an interface, and let me say that Weather is going to implement this interface, and the same for Quotation. Let me go back to TravelPage. Now I can submit readWeather() and readQuotation() to this TravelPageScope. By the way, these two static methods: readWeather() and readQuotation() are launching their own scope, which is perfectly fine. And all we need now is a travelPage() method in this scope object, and of course to override this handleComplete() method, just as we did with the Quotation. So let me handle this RUNNING case right now. And we are going to focus on the SUCCESS case. So the future I have here can carry either a Quotation object, or a Weather object. So maybe I can switch again on the type of this future object. resultNow(): and if it is a Weather object, then I need to save it: this.weather = weather. And if it is a Quotation object, I'm also going to save it somewhere. OK, so now I need two fields: private Quotation quotation and private Weather weather. Now you need to be careful, because there is a race condition here, so these two fields need to be volatile. These switch on type is not compiling currently because there is a glitch in the IDE that I'm using, as of now. It's a preview feature of an early access version. So unfortunately I cannot tell this IDE that it should activate that. Maybe it will be the case in the future, but it's not the case right now. And this switch on the types will fail because I need a default section there, that will do nothing. But it's really a pity to have that, because in fact what I could do is an exhaustive switch as long as this PageComponent is a sealed interface. So let me make it a sealed interface, and let me just say that the only authorized types are Quotation and Weather. Now if go back to this switch, I do not need this default case anymore. Right, so now I am going to handle the FAILED case. And the FAILED case will be kind of the same. Here I can either have a QuotationException or any other type of exception. I'm going to switch on the type of exception once again, it's exceptionNow(). In the case of a QuotationException, so that's an exception, then I'm going to say that this.exception is equal to this exception. And in the default case, let me call that this.quotationException and say that this.exception is equal to exception. And now I need to create these two fields: private volatile QuotationException. And the other one is in fact a Throwable, and I'm going to call it exception. Now, bear with me, even if this code has glitches, it will compile and run just fine. I just need one last case, which is the CANCELLED case, and in that case I'm not going to do much. Now that I have processed all the cases about the futures that I'm going to get, I can focus on my business code, which is this travelPage() method. You see that here I have an interesting business case. Because there is one information, basically the Weather, that is just nice to have: if I don't have it, I can still show something to my client. But the Quotation is itself critical. If I do not have a Quotation, I do not have a travel page. So let me just implement that. If this.quotation is null, then I'm probably in trouble. Basically I have two cases: if this quotationException is not null, it means that something wrong happened when I was trying to query my quotation servers. So maybe I'll do something like new RuntimException this.quotationException. OK, if this quotationException is null, it means that something else very wrong happened, but I'm not sure what. So here I'm just going to throw this RuntimeException this.exception. And I hope that this.exception is not null, and it should not be null, because if it is there is something that is very very wrong in my system. And this.quotation is not null, then this is the happy path of my use case: I can return a travel page. So let me do that: return new TravelPage(), this.quotation, and this.weather. Instead of returning this.weather that could be null, what I could do, I'm going to cut this, is use this nifty factory method from the Objects class, which is requireNonNullElse(). And then I can pass this weather. If this weather is non null then it will be returned by this factory method. But if it is null, it will use this other value, which is a default value: we are going to say that the server is unknown, and the weather is mostly sunny. And now I have all my business rules in this travelPage() method, that I could unit-test very easily. The readTravelPage() code is also super simple, once again, it is written in a synchronous way, but it's really asynchronous code, because the readWeather() and readQuotation() methods are in fact asynchronous methods. So let me run this code, and you can see that I have my travel page, with the Quotation: Server C, price 31, and the weather forecast: Server E, Sunny. There are two last things I would like to show you. First: I would like to add a timeout on this weather forecast. I wouldn't want my visitors to wait for 10mn just because I cannot get the weather forecast quickly enough. So it turns out that there is a nifty method called joinUntil() that does exactly that. So instead of calling join(), let me call joinUntil(). This joinUntil() method takes a deadline as an Instant. So if you want to pass a deadline you can just call Instant.now() and then add milliseconds. Let me add a thousand of them. Add the exception to the method signature, which is a TimeoutException, and run this code again, just to see what it gives. Basically, I am stil having the correct weather forecast. Let me put a little more pressure on it, like, 10ms. I am sure I will have no answer in 10ms, so we are going to see the default value for the weather forecast. Now you can see that the weather forecast we have is from an unknown server, and the weather is mostly sunny. So this is how you can handle timeouts with this scope object. Bytheway, if you want to handle this exception separately, you can also add a branch in this switch statement. And the second thing I would like to show you, is how you can handle ThreadLocal in this case. You remember ThreadLocal, this old stuff from the JDK 1. Loom's virtual threads fully support ThreadLocal, so if you want to stick with them, you can do that. But! You can also do much better. Loom adds a new concept called ExtentLocal. ExtentLocal is not part of the Structured Concurrency incubator API, but you can already play with them with the Loom early access builds. ExtentLocal allows you to give a value to a variable, and run a task within the context of this value. Let me show you how this is working. First, you need to create an ExtentLocal variable with a given type, and for that you have a factory method: ExctentLocal.newInstance(). And then, you can create a Runnable, let me call it task. And it will do the following. If the KEY is bound, it will print the value of this key, which is basically KEY.get(). And if it's not the case, it will just print "Not bound". And of course, if I run this code, it will tell me that the key is not bound. And now, what I'm going to do, it to call ExtentLocal where KEY has the value "A", and within this context I'm going to run this Runnable, and bytheway you can see that I could also execute a Callable. So let me just run this task, OK, in that context. And do the same with a value that is "B". So let me run this code. And now you can see that in the first run, the KEY was bound to the value "A", and this is what our task saw. And in the second run, the KEY was bound to the value "B", and this is also what our task saw. So, this is a very powerful mechanism, just to share variables among different tasks, and among different threads. In this case, I'm not running in a multi-threaded environment. I did not create any new thread, so really everything took place in the main thread. But of course, you can make it work in scopes and threads, let us do that. I just added this code to the Quotation record. First created a LICENCE, which is an ExtentLocal variable of type String. And then added this validation rule to the compact constructor of this Quotation record. Basically, if the LICENCE has not been bound, and if the value is not "Licence A", then no Quotation record can be created, because there is this IllegalStateException that will be thrown. So let me go back to this example, run it, and now you see our suppressed exceptions mechanism that we set up with the QuotationException. The QuotationException has been thrown, that's one exception. And it has a bunch of IllegalStateException: No licence found, because this record could not be created. So let me bind this ExtentLocal to a value. I can do it in that way: ExtentLocal.where Quotation.LICENCE has the value "Licence A". And now, I can call this Callable: TravelPage.readTravelPage(). I can get rid of this one. This is a nice method reference. And let me run this code again. And now everything is fine, the licence has been found. Bytheway if I put a wrong value, you will see that I will have this IllegalStateException again, great: there are there! Let me put A again. And you can also see that this ExtentLocal has been set on the TravelPage, so this licence was made available at the TravelPage level, and transmitted to all the scopes created within this TravelPage. The TravelPage is executed in its own scope, but it creates another scope for the Quotation, and another scope for the Weather. And in fact, this ExtentLocal is available in all the scopes created by this TravelPageScope. Just remember though, this ExtentLocal API is not part of the Structured Concurrency incubator API, it's in the Loom early access distribution. So, you can see that using these scope objects makes your code much simpler than having to write callbacks within callbacks within callbacks within callbacks. Your code is synchronous, it is blocking, but it is fine because it is running on top of virtual threads, and it is much easier to read. Creating scopes is really easy. All you need to do is override this handleComplete() method, that handles one future at a time in a synchronous way, so it's super easy to write. And then you can handle your exceptions as you need, including timeouts. And, with the partial results, and your exceptions, you can add your business code, following your business rules, this is basically what we did in the examples that you just saw. You can also easily write unit tests, whether it is for your scope objects, or your regular classes. So in the end, your application is fully asynchronous, but it does not rely on nested callbacks, only on code written in a synchronous way. And that's a huge step forward! If you want to learn more on this subject, and get information from the source, remember that all the team that develops Loom will be present at JavaOne, next October in Vegas, along with the other teams of the OpenJDK. And I'll be super happy to see you there and share a coffee with you. So please check the links down below. You also have pointers to other videos made by my friends Nicolai and Billy, and if you have any comments or questions, well, you know what to do. And with this, I'm out of coffee, so that's it for today, talk to you soon!